Getting Started with APM (#23490)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/getting_started/tracing/_index.md

## Overview

Datadog Application Performance Monitoring (APM) provides deep visibility into your applications, enabling you to identify performance bottlenecks, troubleshoot issues, and optimize your services.

This guide demonstrates how to get started with APM and send your first trace to Datadog.

At a high level, you need to:

1. Set up Datadog APM to send observability data to Datadog.
1. Run your application to generate data.
1. Explore the collected data in Datadog.

## Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need the following:

1. [Create a Datadog account][1] if you haven't already.
1. Find or create a [Datadog API key][2].
1. Start up a Linux host or VM.

## Set up Datadog APM

To set up Datadog APM without needing to touch your application code, use Single Step APM Instrumentation:

1. Run the installation command:

   ```shell

>     DD_API_KEY=<YOUR_DD_API_KEY> DD_SITE="<YOUR_DD_SITE>" DD_APM_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED=host DD_ENV=<AGENT_ENV> bash -c "$(curl -L https://s3. amazonaws.com/dd-agent/scripts/install_script_agent7.sh)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    DD_API_KEY=<YOUR_DD_API_KEY> DD_SITE="<YOUR_DD_SITE>" DD_APM_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED=host DD_ENV=<AGENT_ENV> bash -c "$(curl -L https://s3.amazonaws.com/dd-agent/scripts/install_script_agent7.sh)"
```

1. Start a new shell session.
1. Restart the services on your host or VM.
1. Verify the Agent is running:

    ```shell
   sudo datadog-agent status
   ```

This approach automatically installs the Datadog Agent, enables Datadog APM, and [instruments][5] your application.

## Create an application

To create an application to observe in Datadog:

1. On your Linux host or VM, create a new Python application named `hello.py`. For example, `nano hello.py`.
1. Add the following code to `hello.py`:

    {{< code-block lang="python" filename="hello.py" collapsible="true" disable_copy="false" >}}
  from flask import Flask
  import random

  app = Flask(__name__)
  
  quotes = [
      "Strive not to be a success, but rather to be of value. - Albert Einstein",
      "Believe you can and you're halfway there. - Theodore Roosevelt",
      "The future belongs to those who believe in the beauty of their dreams. - Eleanor Roosevelt"
  ]
  
  @app.route('/')
  def index():
      quote = random.choice(quotes)+"\n"
      return quote
  
  if __name__ == '__main__':
      app.run(host='0.0.0.0', port=5050)

>       ```

Reviewer: I believe these tick marks shouldn't be there? Typo?

Author: Good catch!

  from flask import Flask
  import random

  app = Flask(__name__)
  
  quotes = [
      "Strive not to be a success, but rather to be of value. - Albert Einstein",
      "Believe you can and you're halfway there. - Theodore Roosevelt",
      "The future belongs to those who believe in the beauty of their dreams. - Eleanor Roosevelt"
  ]
  
  @app.route('/')
  def index():
      quote = random.choice(quotes)+"\n"
      return quote
  
  if __name__ == '__main__':
      app.run(host='0.0.0.0', port=5050)
  {{< /code-block >}}

## Set up Datadog APM

To set up Datadog APM without needing to modify your application's code or the deployment process, use Single Step APM Instrumentation:

<div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/single-step-apm/">Single Step APM Instrumentation</a> is in beta. Alternatively, you can set up APM using <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/dd-libraries/">Datadog tracing libraries</a>.</div>

1. Run the installation command:

   ```shell

>     DD_API_KEY=<YOUR_DD_API_KEY> DD_SITE="<YOUR_DD_SITE>" DD_APM_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED=host DD_ENV=<AGENT_ENV> bash -c "$(curl -L https://s3.amazonaws.com/dd-agent/scripts/install_script_agent7.sh)"

Reviewer 2: wondering if it makes sense to only install the `python` library as a part of this guide as thats what the example code is written in? It might speed up the install and less potential to break things. Unless part of the goal here is to expose users to things that we found that they did not explicitly intend to instrument?

@vidurkhannadatadog @jonbodner any thoughts?

    ```
 

>     Replace `<YOUR_DD_API_KEY>` with your [Datadog API key][4], `<YOUR_DD_SITE>` with your [Datadog site][3], and `<AGENT_ENV>` with the environment your Agent is installed on (for example, `development`).

Author: Good catch! These are not pointing where I intended them to.

1. Start a new shell session.
1. Restart the services on your host or VM.
1. Verify the Agent is running:

    ```shell
   sudo datadog-agent status
   ```

This approach automatically installs the Datadog Agent, enables Datadog APM, and [instruments][5] your application.

## Run the application

When you set up Datadog APM with Single Step Instrumentation, Datadog automatically instruments your application at runtime.

To run `hello.py`:

1. Create a Python virtual environment in the current directory:

   ```shell
   python3 -m venv ./venv
   ```

1. Activate the `venv` virtual environment:

   ```shell
   source ./venv/bin/activate
   ```

> 1. Install `pip` and `flask`:

Author: I see where you are coming from, but I'd like to leave these details off as they are not connected to the main goal of the guide.

   ```

1. Run `hello.py`:

   ```shell
   export DD_SERVICE=hello
   python3 hello.py
   ```

## Test the application

Test the application to send traces to Datadog:

1. In a new command prompt, run the following:

   ```shell
   curl http://0.0.0.0:5050/
   ```
1. Confirm that a random quote is returned.
   ```text
   Believe you can and you're halfway there. - Theodore Roosevelt
   ```

Each time you run the `curl` command, a new trace is sent to Datadog.

## Explore traces in Datadog

1. In Datadog, go to [**APM** > **Services**][3]. You should see a Python service named `hello`:

   {{< img src="/getting_started/apm/service-catalog.png" alt="Service Catalog shows the new Python service." style="width:100%;" >}}

1. Select a service to view its performance metrics, such as latency, throughput, and error rates.
1. Go to [**APM** > **Traces**][4]. You should see a trace for the `hello` service:

   {{< img src="/getting_started/apm/trace-explorer.png" alt="Trace explorer shows the trace for the hello service." style="width:100%;" >}}

1. Select a trace to see its details, including the flame graph, which helps identify performance bottlenecks.

## Advanced APM setup

> Up until this point, you let Datadog automatically instrument the `hello.py` application using Single Step Instrumentation. This is great if you want to capture essential traces across common libraries and languages without touching code or manually installing libraries.

Reviewer: I don't love the "This is great" phrasing -- feels a bit vague -- but not sure how to make it much better lol. I want to do something like "This is the preferred approach if...". Dunno if that's better at all. Defer to you!

Author: Good thinking. I will rephrase this slightly.

However, if you need to collect traces from custom code or require more fine-grained control, you can add [custom instrumentation][6].

> To illustrate this, you are going to import the Datadog Python tracing library into `hello.py` and create a custom span and span tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate this, you will import the Datadog Python tracing library into `hello.py` and create a custom span and span tag.
```

To add custom instrumentation:

1. Install the Datadog tracing library:

   ```shell
   pip install ddtrace
   ```

> 1. Add the highlighted lines to the code in `hello.py`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add the highlighted lines to the code in `hello.py` to create a custom span tag `get_quote` and a custom span tag `quote`:
```

Or something like that, just to be a little more explicit about what we're doing here.

   {{< highlight python "hl_lines=3 15 17" >}}
    from flask import Flask
    import random
    from ddtrace import tracer

    app = Flask(__name__)

    quotes = [
        "Strive not to be a success, but rather to be of value. - Albert Einstein",
        "Believe you can and you're halfway there. - Theodore Roosevelt",
        "The future belongs to those who believe in the beauty of their dreams. - Eleanor Roosevelt"
    ]

    @app.route('/')
    def index():
        with tracer.trace("get_quote") as span:
            quote = random.choice(quotes)+"\n"
            span.set_tag("quote", quote)
            return quote

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(host='0.0.0.0', port=5050)
   {{< /highlight >}}

1. Run `hello.py` in the virtual environment from earlier:
   ```shell
   ddtrace-run python hello.py
   ```
1. Run a few `curl` commands in a separate command prompt:
   ```shell
   curl http://0.0.0.0:5050/
   ```
1. In Datadog, go to [**APM** > **Traces**][4].
1. Select the **hello** trace.

> 1. Find the new custom span in the flame graph and hover over it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Find the new custom `get_quote` span in the flame graph and hover over it:
```

## Overview

Datadog Application Performance Monitoring (APM) provides deep visibility into your applications, enabling you to identify performance bottlenecks, troubleshoot issues, and optimize your services.

This guide demonstrates how to get started with APM and send your first trace to Datadog.

> At a high level, you need to:

Reviewer 3: you will*

1. Set up Datadog APM to send observability data to Datadog.
1. Run your application to generate data.
1. Explore the collected data in Datadog.

## Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need the following:

1. [Create a Datadog account][1] if you haven't already.
1. Find or create a [Datadog API key][2].
1. Start up a Linux host or VM.

## Set up Datadog APM

> To set up Datadog APM without needing to touch your application code, use Single Step APM Instrumentation:

Reviewer 4: Maybe "without needing to modify your application's code or the deployment process"? Want to emphasize that nothing is changed other than installing the datadog agent.

<div class="alert alert-info"><strong>Note</strong>: <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/single-step-apm/">Single Step APM Instrumentation</a> is in beta. Alternatively, you can  set up APM using <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/trace_collection/automatic_instrumentation/dd-libraries/">Datadog tracing libraries</a>.</div>

> 1. Run the installation command:

Reviewer 3: I don't think I follow the flow. Setting up an application should be done before running single step.

   ```shell
    DD_API_KEY=<YOUR_DD_API_KEY> DD_SITE="<YOUR_DD_SITE>" DD_APM_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED=host DD_ENV=<AGENT_ENV> bash -c "$(curl -L https://s3.amazonaws.com/dd-agent/scripts/install_script_agent7.sh)"
    ```
 
    Replace `<YOUR_DD_API_KEY>` with your [Datadog API key][4], `<YOUR_DD_SITE>` with your [Datadog site][3], and `<AGENT_ENV>` with the environment your Agent is installed on (for example, `development`).

1. Start a new shell session.
1. Restart the services on your host or VM.
1. Verify the Agent is running:

    ```shell
   sudo datadog-agent status
   ```

This approach automatically installs the Datadog Agent, enables Datadog APM, and [instruments][5] your application.

## Create an application

To create an application to observe in Datadog:

1. On your Linux host or VM, create a new Python application named `hello.py`. For example, `nano hello.py`.

> 1. Add the following code to `hello.py`:

Reviewer 4: "Add the highlighted lines to the code in `hello.py`" ?

  ]
  
  @app.route('/')
  def index():
      quote = random.choice(quotes)+"\n"
      return quote
  
  if __name__ == '__main__':
      app.run(host='0.0.0.0', port=5050)
  {{< /code-block >}}

## Run the application

When you set up Datadog APM with Single Step Instrumentation, Datadog automatically instruments your application at runtime.

To run `hello.py`:

1. Create a Python virtual environment in the current directory:

   ```shell
   python3 -m venv ./venv
   ```

1. Activate the `venv` virtual environment:

   ```shell
   source ./venv/bin/activate
   ```

1. Install `pip` and `flask`:

   ```shell
   sudo apt-get install python3-pip
   pip install flask
   ```

1. Run `hello.py`:

   ```shell
   export DD_SERVICE=hello
   python3 hello.py
   ```

## Test the application

Test the application to send traces to Datadog:

1. In a new command prompt, run the following:

   ```shell
   curl http://0.0.0.0:5050/
   ```
1. Confirm that a random quote is returned.
   ```text
   Believe you can and you're halfway there. - Theodore Roosevelt
   ```

Each time you run the `curl` command, a new trace is sent to Datadog.

> ## Explore observability data in Datadog

Reviewer 3: Let' call it traces. Observability data is very generic

and let' attach a screen shot of traces too.
